---
title: Teaching Statement
exclude: true
---

I have two goals when teaching Computer Science. My first goal is to
teach a challenging course that encourages student understanding of
deep CS ideas and skills. My second goal is to excite student
imagination so that students continue studying CS outside my
classroom.

# Deep Student Understanding

In the Summer of 2008 I had the opportunity to teach a traditional
large lecture course in Computer Science. I adapted the detailed notes
of the course’s traditional instructor and took care to include
frequent jokes, relevant examples, public coding, and other techniques
to keep interest. I noted the usual problems during my lectures –
student absences, sleeping, wasting time online during lecture. What
worked well in the course was the homework assignments, TA-led active
discussion sections, and the time the students put in studying for the
exams. All these things were very focused on algorithmic problem
solving. In retrospect I think my time in lecture was not as focused;
I concentrated on introducing and covering material, rather than on
solving problems algorithmically. Time in lecture, without some sort
of engagement, is not going to develop the skills and ideas that CS
really needs to pass on to its students.

Since then, I have been designing my classes with a mix of lecture
(for background) and active learning (for developing skills and
reinforcing essential information). In a recent class on databases,
for example, rather then lecture on different types of of statements I
asked students to begin designing their own queries in class working
from a reference. In all the classes where I have tried an active
approach, students self-report greater engagement (look here for some
example classes and feedback) and learning and I have feedback about
whether learning objectives are really being met.

Deep student understanding also needs to be supported by
assessment. Very project oriented assessment strategies can encourage
students to focus on “getting the job done” at the expense of material
discussed in class. Feedback needs to come quickly enough so students
can realize they have a problem and correct it before they have to
perform in a high-stakes exam. Students should know their exams should
focus on solving challenging problems whether programming, drawing
circuit diagrams, doing proofs – not simply reciting algorithms or
other material learned in lecture. Not only does this make students
focus more, but I like it because it makes me think in terms of the
skills I’m trying to develop and not just telling students information
I find interesting for its own sake.

# Excitement

In my opinion, Computer Science becomes more expansive and exciting
every year. But enrollment and retention numbers provide evidence that
many view Computer Science as boring, irrelevant, or beyond their
understanding. My own research interviews with students suggest that,
even student well-into a CS major may not really understand what makes
many areas of CS interesting. This is not just a problem for
recruiting and retention – if a student graduates in Computer Science
they need to have the motivation to continue learning on their own or
their skills will be forgotten or become outdated. For that reason, I
view the development of student excitement to be an essential part of
CS education.

Excitement starts from a welcoming classroom environment. I’ve
interviewed many students whose experience in CS classrooms made them
doubt their abilities to succeed in CS. CS classes often have negative
behaviors; for example, experienced students ask lengthy irrelevant
questions to prove their own technical skill. I make sure to keep
those sorts of questions to office hours or after class – in class
students need to feel comfortable asking novice questions without
embarrassment. Every class also needs to explain why the material is
exciting and useful – motivating examples, jokes, and personal stories
connect computer science to a broader world. Finally, students need to
connect computer science to their own interests and personal
aspirations. Large college classrooms frequently fail at this because
no one feels responsible for ensuring that a student has a good plan
for their careers in CS. Even a single meeting with the professor or a
TA can correct misconceptions about CS and ensure they have a vision
that makes sense. If a student feels supported in the CS community,
knows about the excitement of the field, and connects that to their
personal goals – they should have what they need to develop excitement
about Computer Science.

# Conclusion

We can’t teach all of computer science in just four years. If a
students lack excitement they won’t fully participate and pursue the
field on their own. If they lack a foundation of deep ideas, they will
be frustrated as they attempt to branch out in new areas. Promoting a
deep understanding of computer science while also encouraging student
excitement and exploration can be a difficult thing, but both are
necessary to produce excellent computer science students. I have
concrete ideas that I am looking to put into practice but I’m also
hope I can get new directions from the experienced faculty I work
with. My goals from my students apply to myself as well – I hope to
deepen my understanding of CS Education with new perspectives, while
keeping excitement about the field and all it has to offer our
students.
